lab2/solutions.md, before:


1. Lab 1 Deja vu ! Print the number of requests that had HTTP return code 404. Next break down
number of 404 requests by date (i.e how many on 30th April and how many on 1st May).

Part 1:

    grouped = log_df.groupby('ResponseCode')
    grouped.size()[404]

Part 2:
    day_grouped = log_df.groupby(lambda row: log_df['DateTime'][row].day)
    day_grouped.apply(lambda x: x.groupby('ResponseCode').size())

2. What is the average file size for images (.gif or .jpg or .jpeg files) which
had response code 200 ? What is the standard deviation ?

    ok_url_sizes = log_df[log_df['ResponseCode'] == 200][['URL', 'Size']]
    img_urls =  ok_url_sizes[ok_url_sizes.apply(lambda row: ".gif" in row['URL'] or ".jpeg" in row['URL'] or ".jpg" in row['URL'], axis=1)]
    img_urls['Size'].mean()
    img_urls['Size'].std()

3. Generate a histogram of traffic to the site every *half-hour*. Plot this using matplotlib. 
    half_hour_grouped = log_df.groupby(lambda row: pd.to_datetime(str(log_df['DateTime'][row].hour) + ":" + str((log_df['DateTime'][row].minute / 30)*30)))
    half_hour_grouped.size().plot()

4.

Commit message:

Fix some text. Add another data file

lab2/solutions.md, after:


1. Lab 1 Deja vu ! Print the number of requests that had HTTP return code 404. Next break down
number of 404 requests by date (i.e how many on 30th April and how many on 1st May).

Part 1:

    grouped = log_df.groupby('ResponseCode')
    grouped.size()[404]

Part 2:
    day_grouped = log_df.groupby(lambda row: log_df['DateTime'][row].day)
    day_grouped.apply(lambda x: x.groupby('ResponseCode').size())

2. What is the average file size for images (.gif or .jpg or .jpeg files) which
had response code 200 ? What is the standard deviation ?

    ok_url_sizes = log_df[log_df['ResponseCode'] == 200][['URL', 'Size']]
    img_urls =  ok_url_sizes[ok_url_sizes.apply(lambda row: ".gif" in row['URL'] or ".jpeg" in row['URL'] or ".jpg" in row['URL'], axis=1)]
    img_urls['Size'].mean()
    img_urls['Size'].std()

3. Generate a histogram of traffic to the site every *half-hour*. Plot this using matplotlib.
    half_hour_grouped = log_df.groupby(lambda row: pd.to_datetime(str(log_df['DateTime'][row].hour) + ":" + str((log_df['DateTime'][row].minute / 30)*30)))
    half_hour_grouped.size().plot()

4.

5. The log file used in the lab was from one day of the WorldCup. Lets apply our
analysis to another day's logs. For this start with the raw log file
`https://raw.github.com/shivaram/datascience-labs/master/lab2/data/wc_day6_1_sample.tar.bz2` from
github and load it as a Pandas DataFrame. Repeat the first 3 exercises with it.
How similar or different are the results ?
Hint: You can use UNIX command line tools from Lab 1 to first get a csv file and
then load it into Pandas.

    # First convert data into CSV
    cat wc_day91_1.log | awk -F' ' '{sub(/,/, ".", $7); print $1","$4","$7","$9","$10}' | tr -d '[' | awk -F':' '{ printf("%s,%s:%s:%s", $1, $2, $3, $4); if (NF > 4) { printf(":%s\n", $5) } else { printf("\n") } }' > ~/wc_day91_1.csv

    # If it is too large to fit in memory take a subset of it
    head -n 100000 > ~/wc_day91_1_sample.csv

    # Use the rest of solution for Pandas
